#### Intro
Key-value stores are distributed hash tables (DHTs). A key is generated by the hash function and should be unique. In a key-value store, a key binds to a specific value and doesn’t assume anything about the structure of the value. A value can be a blob, image, server name, or anything the user wants to store against a unique key.

Usually, it’s preferred to keep the size of value relatively smaller (KB to MB). We can put large data in the blob store and put links to that data in the value field. Key-value stores are useful in many situations, such as storing user sessions in a web application and building NoSQL databases.

It’s challenging to scale traditional databases with strong consistency and high availability in a distributed environment. Many real-world services like Amazon, Facebook, Instagram, Netflix, and many more use primary-key access to a data store instead of traditional online transaction processing (OLTP) databases. Examples of key-value store usage include bestseller lists, shopping carts, customer preferences, session management, sales rank, and product catalogs.

#### Requirements
**The functional requirements are as follows:**

* Configurable service: Some applications might have a tendency to trade strong consistency for higher availability. We need to provide a configurable service so that different applications could use a range of consistency models. We need tight control over the trade-offs between availability, consistency, cost-effectiveness, and performance.

* Ability to always write: The applications should always have the ability to write into the key-value storage. If the user wants strong consistency, this requirement might not always be fulfilled due to the implications of the CAP theorem.

* Hardware heterogeneity: The system shouldn’t have distinguished nodes. Each node should be functionally able to do any task. Though servers can be heterogeneous, newer hardware might be more capable than older ones.

**The non-functional requirements are as follows:**

* Scalable: Key-value stores should run on tens of thousands of servers distributed across the globe. Incremental scalability is highly desirable. We should add or remove the servers as needed with minimal to no disruption to the service availability. Moreover, our system should be able to handle an enormous number of users of the key-value store.

* Available: We need to provide continuous service, so availability is very important. This property is configurable. So, if the user wants strong consistency, we’ll have less availability and vice versa.

* Fault tolerance: The key-value store should operate uninterrupted despite failures in servers or their components.

#### Scalability

##### Consistent hashing
Consistent hashing is an effective way to manage the load over the set of nodes. In consistent hashing, we consider that we have a conceptual ring of hashes from 0
0 --> to _n_-1, where _n_ is the number of available hash values. We use each node’s ID, calculate its hash, and map it to the ring. We apply the same process to requests. Each request is completed by the next node that it finds by moving in the clockwise direction in the ring.

Whenever a new node is added to the ring, the immediate next node is affected. It has to share its data with the newly added node while other nodes are unaffected. It’s easy to scale since we’re able to keep changes to our nodes minimal. This is because only a small portion of overall keys need to move. The hashes are randomly distributed, so we expect the load of requests to be random and distributed evenly on average on the ring.

The primary benefit of consistent hashing is that as nodes join or leave, it ensures that a minimal number of keys need to move. However, the request load isn’t equally divided in practice. Any server that handles a large chunk of data can become a bottleneck in a distributed system. That node will receive a disproportionately large share of data storage and retrieval requests, reducing the overall system performance. As a result, these are referred to as hotspots.

##### Virtual nodes
We’ll use virtual nodes to ensure a more evenly distributed load across the nodes. Instead of applying a single hash function, we’ll apply multiple hash functions onto the same key.

Let’s take an example. Suppose we have three hash functions. For each node, we calculate three hashes and place them into the ring. For the request, we use only one hash function. Wherever the request lands onto the ring, it’s processed by the next node found while moving in the clockwise direction. Each server has three positions, so the load of requests is more uniform. Moreover, if a node has more hardware capacity than others, we can add more virtual nodes by using additional hash functions. This way, it’ll have more positions in the ring and serve more requests.

#### Availability

##### Replication

**Peer-to-peer**
n the peer-to-peer approach, all involved storage areas are primary, and they replicate the data to stay updated. Both read and write are allowed on all nodes. Usually, it’s inefficient and costly to replicate in all _n_ nodes. Instead, three or five is a common choice for the number of storage nodes to be replicated.


Peer-to-peer relationship
We’ll use a peer-to-peer relationship for replication. We’ll replicate the data on multiple hosts to achieve durability and high availability. Each data item will be replicated at _n_ hosts, where _n_ is a parameter configured per instance of the key-value store. For example, if we choose _n_ = 5 it means we want our data to be replicated to five nodes.

Each node will replicate its data to the other nodes. We’ll call a node coordinator that handles read or write operations. It’s directly responsible for the keys. A coordinator node is assigned the key “K.” It’s also responsible for replicating the keys to n-1 successors on the ring (clockwise). These lists of successor virtual nodes are called preference lists. To avoid putting replicas on the same physical nodes, the preference list can skip those virtual nodes whose physical node is already in the list.

In the context of the CAP theorem, key-value stores can either be consistent or be available when there are network partitions. For key-value stores, we prefer availability over consistency. It means if the two storage nodes lost connection for replication, they would keep on handling the requests sent to them, and when the connection is restored, they’ll sync up. In the disconnected phase, it’s highly possible for the nodes to be inconsistent. So, we need to resolve such conflicts. In the next lesson, we’ll learn a concept to handle inconsistencies using the versioning of our data.

#### Data versioning
When network partitions and node failures occur during an update, an object’s version history might become fragmented. As a result, it requires a reconciliation effort on the part of the system. It’s necessary to build a way that explicitly accepts the potential of several copies of the same data so that we can avoid the loss of any updates. It’s critical to realize that some failure scenarios can lead to multiple copies of the same data in the system. So, these copies might be the same or divergent. Resolving the conflicts among these divergent histories is essential and critical for consistency purposes.

#### Temporary failures
Typically, distributed systems use a quorum-based approach to handle failures. A quorum is the minimum number of votes required for a distributed transaction to proceed with an operation. If a server is part of the consensus and is down, then we can’t perform the required operation. It affects the availability and durability of our system.

We’ll use a sloppy quorum instead of strict quorum membership. Usually, a leader manages the communication among the participants of the consensus. The participants send an acknowledgment after committing a successful write. Upon receiving these acknowledgments, the leader responds to the client. However, the drawback is that the participants are easily affected by the network outage. If the leader is temporarily down and the participants can’t reach it, they declare the leader dead. Now, a new leader has to be reelected. Such frequent elections have a negative impact on performance because the system spends more time picking a leader than accomplishing any actual work.

In the sloppy quorum, the first n healthy nodes from the preference list handle all read and write operations. The _n_ healthy nodes may not always be the first _n_ nodes discovered when moving clockwise in the consistent hash ring.

#### Conclusion
A key-value store provides flexibility and allows us to scale the applications that have unstructured data. Web applications can use key-value stores to store information about a user’s session and preferences. When using a user key, all the data is accessible, and key-value stores are ideal for rapid reads and write operations. Key-value stores can be used to power real-time recommendations and advertising because the stores can swiftly access and present fresh recommendations.